# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - October 2025
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.

## Completed in October
### Graphics
#### Port of Linux 6.10 Graphics Drivers
The Linux 6.10 graphics driver port is complete. There are a few bugs that pre-date this work that are being worked on to make it more robust before the code is added to the drm-kmod (FreeBSD Graphics) port.

GitHub issue: [#51](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/51)

#### Fix freezing with AMD GPUs DRM drivers
Bug fixed: Desktops using drm-kmod at 6.1 or above with various AMD GPUs (e.g., RX 570 and 580) gradually experience longer and longer freezes up to the point where the desktop becomes totally unusable (after minutes or hours, depending on the particular run).

GitHub issue [#89](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/89)


## Work in review this month
### Power Management
#### S4 (hibernate) draft design
The low-level design was created and put out for review. There are a few areas where more input would be helpful. 

Desktop mailing list thread: [Review the S4 hibernate design](https://lists.freebsd.org/archives/freebsd-arch/2025-October/001043.html)


### Wi-Fi
#### Updates to recently added drivers
Updates to Wi-Fi drivers iwlwifi, mt76, rtw88, and rtw89 to support LinuxKPI v6.17 are being tested currently. 

GitHub issue: [#86](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/86)


## In Progress

### Installation
#### KDE Desktop Installer Option 
A desktop environment option for the FreeBSD installer is in progress. We intend to have it ready for 15.1.

GitHub issue [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)

### Power
#### S4 hibernation (proof of concept)
The team has discussed the challenges around designing the full solution while so many unknowns remain (the design is still in review as noted earlier in this report). 

Therefore, they have decided to take an incremental development approach, starting with a simple proof of concept for the hibernate/wake cycle so that they can develop required infrastructure and build from there. 

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)

#### Debugging tools for low power states
Three different USB-based debugging approaches are in progress.

For the xHCI DbC debugging solution the host (laptop running the debugging tool) side is already in 15.0, and the target (laptop being tested) side is being upstreamed now. Once this lands, FreeBSD developers will be able to debug laptop issues where graphic output stops working, which has been a major barrier to laptop support. 

USB serial debugging support is functional in all FreeBSD releases, with some caveats and further work is postponed while other debugging methods are developed. Documentation for both will arrive together with a handbook chapter update.

It has been determined that although these tools will support some of the low-power state debugging, it would be helpful to also have a hardware-based tool to support this. We have designed and produced a prototype board to activate Debug Accessory Mode (DAM) on USB-C ports. Once functional this should enable debugging using the SOM UART on 2025 and later Framework laptops.

Therefore, a new issue has been opened to track this. 

GitHub issues: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38) and [90](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/90)


### Wi-Fi
#### Support the MediaTek Wireless cards.
Debugging is ongoing. Some progress has been made as it is now giving the same errors on Linux and FreeBSD.

GitHub [#66](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/66)

#### LinuxKPI based Wi-Fi and suspend and resume
Now likely to go into stable/15 as it's been behind LinuxKPI update which is now complete.

GitHub [#58](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/58)


### Integration testing

#### Holistic testing for laptop functionality
The *Laptop Integration Testing project*, set to run between November 2025 through April 2026, is now being scoped and prepared. In October, we started compiling a comprehensive checklist of high-level testing scenarios, along with their associated user stories, to serve as a ground-truth for laptop validation. We also began setting up a hardware lab in the Foundation's office in Kitchener, Canada to host the test targets and enable remote access for laptop developers. The goals of the project are: 
* Test the combined functionality of the work delivered through the Foundation’s Laptop Support and Usability Project.
* Build and maintain a definitive public record of FreeBSD laptop compatibility status.
* Create pathways for volunteer participation and community-driven testing contributions.


NOTE: There is no issue to track this work in GitHub but we are planning to track it somewhere in the repo once it gets into the testing phase in January 2026.


## Conclusion

The project is really showing some tangible deliverables now as it approaches its one year anniversary. The FreeBSD Foundation would like to exend its thanks everyone who has contributed.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Siva Mahadevan
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
