# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - September 2025
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.

## Completed in September
### Power Management
#### Modern Standby (S0i3)
All dependencies for Modern Standby (S0i3) were committed into the FreeBSD kernel codebase. The majority of these are related to implementing the industry standard for advanced power management, ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface). Some issues were discovered after commit and portions were reverted; investigation continues.

GitHub issue: [#32](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32)


### Graphics
#### New graphics port makes Linux 6.9 driver available
There is a new `drm-latest-kmod` port that includes the latest graphic drivers for Linux and AMD. It currently provides Linux-based drivers up to 6.9. NOTE: you must be using a kernel with the corresponding patches. 

[Learn more about the new port](https://lists.freebsd.org/archives/freebsd-desktop/2025-September/006946.html)

GitHub issue: [#50](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/50)

#### Fix freezing with AMD GPUs DRM drivers
Desktops using `drm-kmod` 6.1 or higher with various AMD GPUs (e.g., RX 570 and 580) were experiencing longer and longer freezes up to the point where the desktop becomes totally unusable (after minutes or hours, depending on the particular run).

This has been investigated and fixed.

All FreeBSD fixes are in stable/15 and stable/14, and will be in the next 15.0 and 14.4 releases. The AMDgpu driver fix has been committed to main and all supported branches in the `drm-kmod` project, but this has not been propagated to ports yet. The goal is to have new releases of `drm-kmod` drivers in ports before 15.0.

GitHub issue [#89](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/89) 


### Wi-Fi
#### Wi-Fi Development Guides
Parts 1 & 2 of a three-part guide to developing Wi-Fi on FreeBSD are now live in the FreeBSD Journal. This is an important resource that captures key information to help other developers to successfully work on WiFi. 

GitHub issue: [#78](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/78)



### Audio 
#### Support for Non-Standard Audio Jacks, and Automatic Audio Switching

Work to improve audio device handling, especially those with non-standard pin arrangements on the audio jacks, is now complete. 

Since the patch had been in review for a while without much user feedback, after request from the release engineering team, we decided to ship it with 15.0-RELEASE so we could get more user testing and feedback

GitHub issues: [#15](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/15) and [#17](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/17)

### Laptop Project Q3 roadmap 
The Foundation has reviewed and updated the Laptop Support and Usability Improvements Project roadmap. To see the Q3 roadmap document, please go to: 
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/blob/main/monthly-updates/Q3-2025-roadmap.pdf 

## Work in review this month

#### Support for putting USB4 into low power states
Part of the large update to add an HCM (host connection manager) for USB4 is committed, but part is still in review. This change will mean that USB4 controllers can be put into a low power state which is necessary for modern standby state, S0i3. 

GitHub issue: [#61](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/61)

#### Updates to recently added Wi-Fi drivers
The work to update the Wi-Fi drivers iwlwifi, mt76, rtw88, and rtw89 to LinuxKPI v6.16 is almost complete. 

All the foundational LinuxKPI changes needed for suspend/resume are now merged into FreeBSD main and these will be in FreeBSD 15.0 release. The driver updates (iwlwifi, rtw88, rtw89) are coming in October 2025. 


GitHub issue: [#86](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/86)

## Progress updates
### Power Management
#### Debugging tools for low power states
The work is almost complete on the xhci debugging solution - the host (laptop running the debugging tool) side is already in 15.0, and the target (laptop being tested) side is being upstreamed now. Once this lands, FreeBSD developers will be able to debug laptop suspend/resume issues, which has been a major barrier to laptop support.

Work on usb serial debugging is paused currently while xhci debug is progressed. Documentation for both will arrive together with a handbook chapter update

GitHub issue: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38)

#### S4 (hibernate) design
The timebox for providing feedback on the solution design for  S4 (hibernate) power state has passed (thanks to all who contributed), so we are moving forward with the detailed design phase.

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)

### Graphics
#### Port of Linux 6.10 Graphics Drivers
The Linux 6.10 graphics drivers are functionally complete but blocked on stability issues, particularly:

* Console (vt) not working with amdgpu.
* i915 crashes and hangs during shutdown/reboot.

This is not shipping yet, it's in active debugging.

GitHub issue: [#51](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/51)

### Wi-Fi
#### Suspend and resume for LinuxKPI-based Wi-Fi
Dependencies (changes for the kernel) are now in main. The suspend and resume framework will follow in October, disabled by default and users can enable it via a sysctl to test it as the ability to test locally is limited.

GitHub issue: [#58](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/58)

#### iwx followup tasks
Some tasks were identified that should be done to improve the new iwx implementation. These are currently not under active development due to other priorities, however we are still reviewing and testing the community-based changes as they come in.
GitHub issue: [#72](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/72)

### Compatibility and System Requirements
#### Create tool for binary upgrades between major/minor versions using pkgbase
This work has been paused as there is an actively progressing community effort to address the same goals.

GitHub issue: [#83](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/82)

#### KDE Desktop Installer Option
For FreeBSD 15 (but after 15.0), our goal is to extend the FreeBSD installer to offer a minimal KDE-based desktop as an install option.  The initial concept is a low-interaction installation process that, upon completion, brings the user directly to a KDE graphical login screen.

The functionality is complete, and is now being tested locally. It will be shared for testing soon on FreeBSD mailing lists. 

GitHub issue: [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)


## Conclusion

We are making significant progress on the project goals, and the FreeBSD Foundation would like to exend its thanks everyone who has contributed.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
