# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - November 2025
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.

## Completed in November
### Wi-Fi
#### iwx: outstanding items
A number of known issues with iwx (an Intel Wi-Fi driver) were logged in April when support for the driver was first added to FreeBSD. Thanks to a mix of Foundation and community work, these are now all resolved.

GitHub issue: [#72](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/72)

#### LinuxKPI Wi-Fi driver updates for 15.0
A round of updates to Linux Wi-Fi updates has been included in the 15.0 release (release date 2025-12-01). These include iwlwifi, mt76, rtw88, and rtw89 updated to support LinuxKPI v6.17

GitHub issue: [#86](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/86)


## In Progress

### Installation
#### KDE Desktop Installer Option 
A desktop environment option for the FreeBSD installer is in progress. We intend to have it ready for 15.1. This month, support for NVIDIA and NVIDIA OPTIMUS has been added.

GitHub issue [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)


### Power
#### S4 hibernation
The team is working on an iterative approach to the S4 solution as there will likely be some unknown elements that emerge along the way. This month, progress has been made on creating tooling that produces a dummy S4 image and allows the hibernating computer to load it for FreeBSD. 

The next steps are to have the computer check in the swap partition (virual memory area) and boot up from the image it finds there, and to decide how to save the computer's state into an S4 image so we can move on from using a dummy image.

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)



#### Power management tooling
Investigation work has started into the tooling available to understand how power is being used by different systems while a laptop is running FreeBSD. The eventual goal is to be able to manage power consumption so that a laptop can run for up to 8 hours on a single charge. Some tools that have been evaluated are: PowerTop and Tuned (Linux tools), and perfetto (Android tool).

GitHub issue: [#6](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/6)


#### Debugging tools for low power states
Three different USB-based debugging approaches are in progress. 

##### USB Debug capability (DbC)

We now have a working proof of concept for USB-C debugging between two laptops. Testing revealed that a USB3 debug cable combined with two USB-C/USB3 adapters successfully establishes an xHCI debug connection. This configuration has shown us the specific pin connections needed to create a custom USB-C cable adapter. Once we have this adapter, it will make debugging significantly more accessible for developers, eliminating the need for specialized cables that are both difficult to source and expensive.

##### Hardware debugging tool
We now have custom circuit board which we can plug into the Framework laptop to activate *Debug Accessory Mode* on USB-C ports. This gives us access to the SOC UART on the Framework laptop, which now appears as a serial device. However, the system console implementation is different to what we were expecting, and we are currently working to get full console debugging functionality.


##### USB serial debugging
As in previous reports, support is functional in all FreeBSD releases with some caveats. Further work is postponed while other debugging methods are developed. 

We will publish documentation for all debugging solutions in the FreeBSD handbook chapter once the work is complete.

GitHub issues: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38) and [90](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/90)

### Wi-Fi
#### Support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards
The work on this is ongoing because it involves a significant amount of debugging across different platforms to locate what needs to change to make it work for FreeBSD. The investigative work this month has revealed that the solution involves major changes to LinuxKPI (FreeBSD compatibility layer for Linux drivers) and breaking changes to how FreeBSD manages memory which will require other drivers to also be updated. Changes to drm-kmod (graphics package) will also be needed. Progress has been made this month with basic Wi-Fi functionality such as scanning and packet transmission.

GitHub issue: [#66](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/66)

#### LinuxKPI based Wi-Fi suspend and resume
*No update this month.* Now likely to go into stable/15 as it's been behind LinuxKPI update which is now complete.

GitHub issue [#58](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/58)


### Integration testing

#### Holistic testing for laptop functionality
*NOTE: This item has not changed since last month's report, but we include it for visibility as there is no specific GitHub issue.* 

The *Laptop Integration Testing project*, set to run between November 2025 through April 2026, is now being scoped and prepared. In October, we started compiling a comprehensive checklist of high-level testing scenarios, along with their associated user stories, to serve as a ground-truth for laptop validation. We also began setting up a hardware lab in the Foundation's office in Kitchener, Canada to host the test targets and enable remote access for laptop developers. The goals of the project are: 
* Test the combined functionality of the work delivered through the Foundation’s Laptop Support and Usability Project.
* Build and maintain a definitive public record of FreeBSD laptop compatibility status.
* Create pathways for volunteer participation and community-driven testing contributions.


NOTE: There is no issue to track this work in GitHub but we are planning to track it somewhere in the repo once it gets into the testing phase in January 2026.


## Acknowledgements

The FreeBSD Foundation would like to exend its thanks everyone who has contributed to this project, both this month and previously.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Siva Mahadevan
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
