# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - June 2025

## Completed in June

### Port of Linux 6.7 Graphics Drivers
The [pull request](https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod/pull/332) to add support for Linux 6.7 graphics drivers to drm-kmod was merged into the drm-kmod main branch.

Users with Meteor Lake systems gain graphics support with this drm-kmod update.

GitHub issue: [#47](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/47)

### Port of Linux 6.8 Graphics Drivers 
The [pull request](https://github.com/freebsd/drm-kmod/pull/344) to add support for Linux 6.8 graphics drivers to drm-kmod was merged into the drm-kmod main branch.

With this drm-kmod update, users gain support for recent Intel and AMD GPUs as well as improved performance and stability.

GitHub issue: [#49](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/49)

### Reduce Scheduler Backlog
Laptop users can benefit from improved performance and power efficiency with support for heterogeneous CPU cores.  As a prerequisite for this on FreeBSD, some scheduler work needs to be completed.  One key item is the introduction of a 256-queue runqueue, which consolidates scheduling into a single runqueue and simplifies thread selection logic in the CPU scheduler.

An important CPU scheduler change has been [committed](https://https://cgit.freebsd.org/src/commit/?id=6792f3411f6d99e1698589835adbf6b7b51c7c74) to the FreeBSD main branch and is currently undergoing broader testing by developers.

GitHub issue: [#54](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/54)

### Prevent AMD Laptops from Sporadically Waking with S0ix
S0ix is a set of low-power idle states on modern Intel and AMD systems that allow the CPU and platform to enter a near-zero power state while still appearing fully powered to the operating system. This enables instant resume and efficient power savings during idle periods. As part of the broader effort to bring full S0ix support to FreeBSD, an issue causing AMD laptops to sporadically wake from sleep was fixed.

Prototype scheduler changes addressed the issue. The scheduler now always stays in the idle thread under suspend, and we now handle regular sporadic interrupts on CPU0.

GitHub issue: [#55](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/55)

## Progress updates

### Power Management

#### Modern standby
Modern standby requires multiple components to work in sync.  Our development and proof-of-concept efforts have uncovered issues in system firmware, and we are collaborating with upstreams to address them.  For example, we are currently waiting for [an ACPI pull request](https://github.com/acpica/acpica/pull/993) to be merged upstream.  The ACPICA team has agreed to work with our August code slush deadline to ensure this support can be included in FreeBSD 15.0.

We have also integrated CPU transitions to target C-states using an experimental scheduler change that  appears to be functioning correctly.

We are preparing a test image to assist in identifying and debugging firmware interface issues.  This image will allow users to experiment with modern standby features while development continues outside the main FreeBSD tree.

GitHub issue: [#32](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32)

#### USB Debugging Tool
Kernel debugging using the XHCI debug standard is working as a proof of concept.  In June, work began to update the patch set to improve the interface between the loader and the kernel. These changes should make XHCI debug more robust and address occasional panics when booting a kernel. There remain issues with performance over the emulated serial link, and crashes can occur when using XHCI debug as a system console.

GitHub issue: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38)

FreeBSD supports an additional method for kernel debugging using USB serial devices.  An update is in progress to make this function out of the box in FreeBSD, and we are documenting the process to use this on all versions of FreeBSD.  Effort went into analysing locking issues for using USB serial as a console, but it isn't clear if this can be unlocked sufficiently to use with witness enabled.

GitHub issue: [#73](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/73)

#### High Performance from Laptops with Heterogeneous Cores
We are in the early stages of designing scheduler changes to support hybrid systems with a mix of performance and efficiency cores.  This work involves collaboration with other FreeBSD committers who have experience with similar hardware.

As part of this effort, a [wiki page](https://wiki.freebsd.org/Scheduler/Hybrid) has been created to outline relevant technologies, challenges, and early design ideas.

GitHub issue: [#22](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/22)

### WiFi

#### Wi-Fi 6 (802.11ax) Support Progress
Work continued to prepare FreeBSD’s wireless stack for Wi-Fi 6 (802.11ax). Internal structures and definitions for 802.11ax have been updated with correct values and moved from LinuxKPI into `net80211`, making them more widely available.  Some of these updates are now visible in `ifconfig`, which will aid debugging as initial Wi-Fi 6 support is brought up.

In parallel, work began on improving LinuxKPI's ACPI support to allow wireless drivers to compile without modification.  This is a necessary step for enabling Wi-Fi 6 and future features.  While initial patches were accepted, issues with how `drm-kmod` handled ACPI naming prevented merging.  The reviews have been updated with a technical opt-in to avoid breaking existing builds.  These reviews are still pending: [D50863](https://reviews.freebsd.org/D50863), [D50864](https://reviews.freebsd.org/D50864).

GitHub issue: [#34](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/34)

#### Intel WiFi Followup Tasks
Suspend and resume functionality for iwx was committed in June. Improvements during association to best take advantage of network rates and automatically select the correct regdomain are still planned. Hardware crypto offload is supported in the current driver in main.

GitHub issue: [#72](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/72) 


#### Suspend and Resume for LinuxKPI-based Wi-Fi
PCI-related changes to enable suspend/resume with LinuxKPI-based Wi-Fi drivers are now functional. However, graphics output on resume is still not functioning.  Debugging around this issue is ongoing.

GitHub issue: [#58](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/58)

### Compatibility and System Requirements

#### KDE Desktop Installer Option
For FreeBSD 15.0, our goal is to extend the FreeBSD installer to offer a minimal KDE-based desktop as an install option.  The initial concept is a low-interaction installation process that, upon completion, brings the user directly to a KDE graphical login screen.

We are currently evaluating the required `pkg` dependencies to automatically select appropriate graphics drivers.

GitHub issue: [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)

#### USBHID Peripherals Support
USBHID support will enable better compatibility with modern peripherals, particularly USB mice, keyboards, and game controllers, and will also allow the use of special function keys on keyboards.  We are tracking and advocating for ongoing community work in this area to help move it through the review process, as it will provide clear benefits for laptop users.

GitHub issue: [#75](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/75)

#### Support for Non-Standard Audio Jacks, and Automatic Audio Switching
Work continues on improvements to audio device handling, especially those with non-standard pin arrangements on the audio jacks. 

We have an open review to enable audio routing between sound devices in a system. This should enable automatically changing sound output across multiple PCM devices. You can help by testing the change: https://reviews.freebsd.org/D50070 

GitHub issue: [#17](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/17)

#### Specialty Keys
We have been investigating support for specialty keys under KDE.  On test devices, most keys work out of the box.  Volume, brightness, and media keys are automatically detected and configured by the desktop environment, with reconfiguration options available through the settings menu.  However, on the systems we tested, some keys such as airplane mode are not detected by KDE.  We are now investigating how to handle these keys and will write documentation to help users enable those not automatically recognized.

GitHub issue: [#19](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/19)

#### HDMI Support
We have started investigating how to improve external monitor support and selection through HDMI.  An initial survey was performed under KDE with Framework laptops and a range of external monitors.  The results were promising.

We also began investigating adding support for controlling external monitor settings using DDC, a monitor's native interface which exposes values and control for colour, brightness, and audio volume.

GitHub issue: [#27](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/27) 

## Conclusion

We are seven months into the project, and are starting to see more major items landing in FreeBSD main. The FreeBSD Foundation thanks everyone who has contributed.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx WiFi driver source code.

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.

