# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - March 2026
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.

## New in March
### Call for Testing
Our rigorous testing program to comprehensively validate all laptop and desktop functionality together has now reached the community testing phase.

Since January, we have been working behind the scenes to evaluate testing requirements and implement the tooling needed to maintain these test results for the long term.

After trial runs of integration testing on our committed target systems, we are pleased to open up this effort to the FreeBSD community!

[Test FreeBSD on your laptop](https://freebsdfoundation.org/blog/call-for-testing-introducing-the-laptop-integration-testing-project/)

### Added to the project board
#### Intel Xe graphics driver 
We have added an issue to GitHub to track our planned work on the Intel Xe graphics driver.

GitHub issue [#111](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/111)

### Q1 update to the project roadmap
The project roadmap has been updated in March 2026.

[Roadmap-Q1 2026](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/blob/main/monthly-updates/Roadmap-Q1%202026.pdf)

## In Review
### Graphics
#### Port of Linux 6.11 Graphics Drivers
Work on porting the Linux 6.11 graphics driver is complete. FreeBSD src changes to support drm-kmod 6.11 are complete and committed to main, and the changes to drm-kmod are in review.

GitHub issue: [#52](
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/52)

### Power
#### S0i3 Modern Standby
Work is complete and debugging continues. The main issue is now related to the NVMe drive not resuming properly. See the GH issue for more details.

GitHub issue [#32](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32)

### System management
#### Making pkgbasify more efficient
We have made some commits in pkg that fix a bug which was blocking the improved pkg installation workflow 

Once a new pkg release including those fixes is available pkgbasify can be updated and work will be complete.

GitHub issue: [#91](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/91)

## In Progress
### Power
#### S4 hibernation
The design for the final implementation of the S4 hibernate state saving is much further along now thanks to the input of community members, Warner Losch and John Baldwin. This should make the resulting implementation much faster and more likely to be successful.

We are continuing to experiment on how to bring up the system and debugging it. There is a working branch for this part of the functionality.

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)

#### Power consumption management tooling
We now have a full workflow of getting data about battery and power usage from acpi and rapl into Perfetto. We are looking at benchmark base lines towards developing some example problems to document using perfetto to look at power issues.

As we develop these we expect to uncover rough edges and missing features required to make these examples useful.

GitHub issue: [#6](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/6)

#### Performance management tooling
This functionality, known as CPPC (Collaborative Processor Performance Control) will help to improve performance and efficiency of FreeBSD on laptops which have the relevant processors.

We are working on improving the Intel functionality to be the same as the AMD functionality. There has also been some refactoring on the AMD implementation.

GitHub issue: [#108](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/108)


### Installation
#### KDE Desktop Installer Option 
The feature remains on track for 15.1. Progress this month includes user-facing error and information messages, and improved GPU auto-detection and driver selection menus. 

GitHub issue: [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)

### Wi-Fi
 
#### Support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards
Work continued on bringing MediaTek wireless support in line with others by improving shared dependencies and making sure the drivers benefit from ongoing fixes.
 
USB support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards is in progress.


GitHub issue: [#66](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/66)

#### Updated support for RealTek Wi-Fi cards

It turned out that some extra work for Realtek was needed (we thought that it was complete last month) and efforts have been focused on fixing connection issues, improving how networks are found, and handling quirks in some cards to make them more stable.
 
GitHub issue: [#99](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/99)

#### Wi-Fi 6
We are currently working on getting more drivers working (Realtek and Mediatek in addition to Intel) which do support WiFi 6 (11ax and 11be) before the stack work (native nat80211 and LinuxKPI) resumes.

GitHub issue: [34](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/34)


## Acknowledgements

The FreeBSD Foundation would like to extend its thanks to everyone who has contributed to this project, both this month and previously.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Siva Mahadevan
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
