# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - February 2026
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.
## Completed in February
### Wi-Fi
#### Updated support for RealTek Wi-Fi cards
Wi-Fi 4 and 5 support for the rtw88 and rtw89 Wi-Fi cards will be available in 15.1
 
GitHub issue: [#99](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/99)
## In Review
#### S0i3 Modern Standby
Work is complete, except for an outstanding bug, which is causing some CPUs to exit the C3 idle state when they shouldn't be. Investigation is ongoing.

GitHub issue [#32](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32)

### Installation
#### KDE Desktop Installer Option 
A desktop environment option for the FreeBSD installer was provided for community testing in February. Feedback from the testing is now being incorporated, and the feature remains on track for 15.1.

GitHub issue: [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)

## In Progress

### Power
#### S4 hibernation
Development work on saving the computer's state into an S4 image is now mature enough for development work to start on the wake-up functionality, and that work has started in February. 

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)

#### Power consumption management tooling
Work is ongoing to enable the Perfetto port to report on power consumption by key FreeBSD components when running on a laptop. Probes are being created to detect the power draw of USB-C connected devices, and to detect battery and kernel events which together can be used to build an understanding of where power is being used.

This work is being extended to cover additional power interfaces, enabling a more complete picture of system power consumption across both Intel and AMD hardware.

GitHub issue: [#6](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/6)

#### Performance management tooling
Work is ongoing to enable a native functionality of AMD processors which allows users to control some aspects of the laptop's performance using either a manual or an auto mode. 

This functionality, known as CPPC (Collaborative Processor Performance Control) will help to improve performance and efficiency of FreeBSD on laptops which have the relevant processors.

GitHub issue: [#108](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/108)


#### Debugging tools for low power states

Work continues on several USB debugging mechanisms that will work in the absence of a functional graphics driver (needed for low power states).

There are functional interfaces for usb serial debugging and debugging using the SoC on 2025 and onwards framework laptops in all FreeBSD verions. FreeBSD 16 will feature xhci debugging and can be evaluated from active code reviews.

We are presently documenting these features and will update relevant materials in time.

GitHub issues: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38) and [#90](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/90)

### Wi-Fi
 
#### Support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards
Recent driver updates from the manufacturer have been imported, but there are some dependencies which need to be updated so that everything works as intended. 
 
USB support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards is in progress.
GitHub issue: [#66](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/66)

#### WiFi 6 support 
Work is in progress, with much of the effort being directed to updating net80211, an underlying component that is needed to develop the WiFi 6 functionality. In February, investigations started into which ports break when net80211 is changed, so that the problems can be understood and resolved.

GitHub issue: [#34](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/34)

### Graphics
#### Port of Linux 6.11 Graphics Drivers
Work on porting the Linux 6.11 graphics driver is approximately 50% complete.

GitHub issue: [#52](
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/52)

### System management
#### Making pkgbasify more efficient

Work is continuing to improve the efficiency of how pkgbasify works.

GitHub issue: [#91](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/91)

### Integration testing

#### Holistic testing for laptop project functionality
Testing of available (completed) *Laptop Project* functionality is now complete for the [Framework 13 7040 Ryzen system](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/blob/main/supported/laptops.md), a Framework desktop machine and a Lenovo Yoga 11e.

A simple community contributor testing workflow is due to be announced in March so users can submit results of standardized testing scripts.

A proof-of-concept for a queryable public laptop compatibility reference for users is also progressing. We hope to incorporate and build on existing similar community resources to produce a sustainable, improved page. 
 
See the dedicated GitHub repo for more information:
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/freebsd-laptop-testing/blob/main/monthly-updates/2026-02.md 



## Acknowledgements

The FreeBSD Foundation would like to extend its thanks to everyone who has contributed to this project, both this month and previously.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Siva Mahadevan
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
