# FreeBSD Foundation Laptop Update - January 2026
NOTE: For more details on any item, please visit the GitHub links provided, these contain more detail and links to relevant materials such as code commits.

## In Review
#### S0i3 Modern Standby
Many of the recent features and improvements for modern standby have been merged, specifically s2idle support (a.k.a. suspend-to-idle) and the SPMC (System Power Management Controller) driver. 

The focus has now moved on to a remaining issue, which is why some CPUs are exiting the C3 idle state when they shouldn't be. 

GitHub issue [#32](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/32)

### Installation
#### KDE Desktop Installer Option 
A desktop environment option for the FreeBSD installer is now ready for testing. A Call for Testing has been shared on the Desktop mailing list (click through to the GitHub issue for links).

GitHub issue: [#25](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/25)

## In Progress

### Power
#### S4 hibernation
The team is working on an iterative approach to the S4 solution as we are expecting unknown elements to emerge along the way. 

Development work on saving the computer's state into an S4 image is progressing well.  It will shortly be mature enough for development work to start on the wake-up functionality.

Developers are also investigating the potential of system simulator tool, simics, to help with developing across sleep states. 

GitHub issue: [#29](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/29)

#### Power consumption management tooling
Work has started on enabling the Perfetto port to report on power consumption by key FreeBSD components when running on a laptop. Probes are being created to detect the power draw of USB-C connected devices, and to detect battery and kernel events which together can be used to build an understanding of where power is being used.  

GitHub issue: [#6](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/6)

#### Performance management tooling
Work has started on enabling some native functionality of AMD processors which will allow the user to control some aspects of the laptop's performance using either a manual or an auto mode. 

This functionality, known as CPPC (Collaborative Processor Performance Control) will help to improve performance and efficiency of FreeBSD on laptops which have the relevant processors.

GitHub issue: [#108](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/108)


#### Debugging tools for low power states

Work continues on several USB debugging mechanisms that will work in the absence of a functional graphics driver (needed for low power states).

There are functional interfaces for usb serial debugging and debugging using the SoC on 2025 and onwards framework laptops in all FreeBSD verions. FreeBSD 16 will feature xhci debugging and can be evaluated from active code reviews.

We are presently documenting these features and will update relevant materials in time.

GitHub issues: [#38](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/38) and [#90](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/90)

### Wi-Fi

#### Support for RealTek Wi-Fi cards
There are some changes ready to push which will update Wi-Fi 4 and 5 support for the rtw88 and rtw89 Wi-Fi cards, but first we need to incorporate recent driver updates from the manufacturers. These updates also cause regressions in support for iwlwifi so this also needs to be fixed first.

USB support for RealTek Wi-Fi cards is also in progress.

GitHub issue: [#99](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/99)

#### Support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards
Similarly to the update on ReakTek, there have been recent driver updates from the manufacturer which are being imported (now in review). 

Work is ongoing to implement the previous changes we made so they work with the updated drivers. 

USB support for MediaTek Wi-Fi cards is in progress.

GitHub issue: [#66](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/66)


### Graphics
#### Port of Linux 6.11 Graphics Drivers
Work on porting the Linux 6.11 graphics driver is in progress.

GitHub issue: [#52](
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/52)

### System management
#### Making pkgbasify more efficient

Work is continuing to improve the efficiency of how pkgbasify works. For example, it now upgrades pkg before it starts, and only installs the packages that are needed.

It also now handles shared libraries better, allowing you to specify any ignored shared libraries.

GitHub issue: [#91](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/issues/91)

### Integration testing

#### Holistic testing for laptop project functionality
Testing of available (completed) *Laptop Project* functionality is now complete for the [Framework 13 7040 Ryzen system](https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/proj-laptop/blob/main/supported/laptops.md), and testing has begun on a Framework desktop machine.

Work has also started on creating a simple community contributor testing workflow so users can submit results of standardized testing scripts.

Also started is a proof-of-concept for a queryable public laptop compatibility reference for users. We hope to incorporate and build on existing similar community resources to produce a sustainable, improved page. 
 
See the dedicated GitHub repo for more information:
https://github.com/FreeBSDFoundation/freebsd-laptop-testing



## Acknowledgements

The FreeBSD Foundation would like to exend its thanks everyone who has contributed to this project, both this month and previously.

Thanks go out to:
* Our developers
  * Alfonso Siciliano
  * Aymeric Wibo
  * Bjoern Zeeb
  * Christos Margiolis
  * Isaac Freund
  * Jean-Sebastien Pedron
  * Li-Wen Hsu
  * Mitchell Horne
  * Olivier Certner
  * Siva Mahadevan
  * Tom Jones
* The project team:
  * Deb Goodkin
  * Ed Maste
  * Joe Mingrone
  * Alice Sowerby
* The Laptop and Desktop Working Group
  * Chris Moerz
  * All attendees
* The FreeBSD Project
* Quantum Leap Research
* AMD, who have helped in troubleshooting sleep issues.
* Dell, who have donated the UVC kernel driver.
* Future Crew, who provided the iwx 
driver source code.
* Netflix, who have been testing our scheduler patchsets

Please refer to the [README](../README.md) for more information about the FreeBSD Foundation's Laptop Project.
